# Finding Balance
Finding the ‘right’ balance with my kids, oddly enough, over time this has been more difficult than I would have expected.  Early on it was easy, as a dad, I was protector, provider, and director but as they grow my involvement in each of those areas lessen as they understand more and develop their own view of the world.  This is expected and arguably how it should be.  But striking the balance of watching them fail and learn the lesson for themselves and when is the right time to offer a helping hand becomes more nuanced as they get older. 

Finding the ‘right’ balance in the office is just a nuanced, the softer side of an Enterprise Architect is all about balance.  We are often trying to find the right balance in discussions with colleagues when hammering out an approach or design.  When do we push the conversation along?  When do we hold back?  Are we over engineering the solution?  Is the current conversation more productive than getting to the last page of the deck or proposal.  Does the estimated cost outweigh the value to the customer?

I find it helpful to keep the outcome in mind.   Making sausage isn’t very fun, but the outcome is often tasty.    (Sorry to those vegetarians out there).  Focusing on the outcome helps me, let go, of personal hubris and lets me focus on listening to others which ultimately broadens the opportunities to find a creative solution and opens opportunities for my personal growth.   Focusing on outcome takes the personal nature out of the equation, making the critiques become less personal.  The thing is that we get this wrong all the time.  Push when we shouldn’t.  We hold when we need to push.  Acknowledging that we’re walking this tightrope and that we’re not going to get it ‘right’ all the time, lessons the stress and sets us up for success when we achieve the desired outcome or goal.   

Finding balance on a work project is an ongoing process that requires self-awareness and adaptability.  Here are some simple strategies that I’ve found helpful over time.  Remember, a balanced approach not only leads to better work outcomes but also contributes to a healthier, better state of mind and dear I say a happier life.

### Set Clear Goals and Priorities
Start by defining the project’s objectives and breaking them down into manageable tasks. Prioritize these tasks based on their importance and deadlines. This approach helps you stay focused on the outcome and avoid feeling overwhelmed.
### Communicate Effectively
Maintain open lines of communication with your team and stakeholders and your team.  If you’re running an ‘agile’ team lean into the ceremonies and standups.  Regular updates and retros can prevent misunderstandings and ensure everyone is on the same page. 
### Set Boundaries
Establish clear boundaries between work and personal life.  It’s easy for me to get caught up in solving the problem.  Finding that bug.  I have to pay attention to this one, especially when working from home.   This separation helps me maintain a healthy work-life balance, gives me time to build into my family and prevents burnout.
### Take Care of Your Health
Prioritize your physical and mental health. Regular exercise, a balanced diet, and adequate sleep are essential for maintaining energy levels and focus.  If you’re not finding the right work-life balance this is an area that is probably lacking.   This has been an area where I tend to flex the most.  Don’t beat yourself up if you’re not on top of your game here.  We all ebb and flow when it comes to carving out time for regular exercise.  
### Seek Support When Needed
This is a team sport.  High performing team have a high degree of psychological safety, and trust and respect each other.  This helps lower any barriers if you’re feeling overwhelmed, don’t hesitate to ask for help.  Whether it’s from a colleague, manager, or a professional, seeking support can provide new perspectives and solutions to challenges you’re facing.
### Reflect and Adjust
Regularly reflect on your progress and the strategies you’re using.  Be willing to adjust or learn a new approach as needed to help you grow personally, professionally, meet customer expectations and find balance.
